At the heart of the Middle East lie the lands where Jesus walked.
What were they like when he was there and what lessons do they hold for our life today?
The palace fortress of Herodium south of Jerusalem built by Herod the Great.
Like many fortresses it sits on a mountain providing great visibility all around and an
ideal looking spot to start our journey.
To place ourselves on the map we even listed the help of one of the local brothers who knows
how to get the best view of this land.
Daniel, this view is amazing.
What can we actually see from up here?
Well this is a great spot because you can see so many famous locations from the Bible
that we've all heard about.
For example we have Jerusalem just behind us, the Mount of Olives.
This is where the Gideon wilderness starts and down there you can see it from here is
the Dead Sea.
So it really gives you an idea of the extent of the promised land.
But more than anything it connects us to the story of Jesus.
Not just because this place is linked with Herod the Great but because from here you have
a great view of Bethlehem right there over the hill.
While the birthplace of Jesus that's an amazing thing to see.
Do you know what strikes me looking at the terrain?
Is it so hilly?
People must have spent their lives just going up and down hills.
Yes for sure just think about it.
We are 750 meters above sea level and Bethlehem is just a little bit higher than us but the
Dead Sea that is so close is minus 400 meters is the lowest place on earth.
So when the Bible says that they went down to a place that they went up to a place it's
something very literal.
So it's not up in terms of north on a map it's up in terms of sea level.
Yes and it's a very important lesson we can learn from the geography of this place.
From the Dead Sea in the south close to where our journey has begun to the peak of Mount
Hermann in the north the elevation changes by over 3,000 meters.
The further you travel here the more hills and mountains you have to climb.
To understand the long Arduous Germany Jesus family would have taken to Jerusalem for
the annual festivals Daniel has brought me to another looking point near Nazareth.
Yes there were two main routes leading up towards Jerusalem both of them passing right through
here this very valley.
So just imagine them from Nazareth just behind us going down into the valley then slowly
trekking up about 600 meters in elevation through Samaria before eventually reaching
Jerusalem.
From what I've seen today I can't imagine that was an easy journey.
No not at all it doesn't stay nice and flat like this for long.
Understanding this land gives more meaning to the journeys described in the Bible.
The Joseph and the heavily pregnant Mary humbly and obediently traveled up to Bethlehem.
Later they made it their families custom to go from year to year up to Jerusalem.
Mary and Joseph overcame physical obstacles to share and true worship at the temple.
But we don't have to come here to walk in their footsteps.
We can do that in a sense by climbing our own hills and mountains for Jehovah by overcoming
whatever obstacles we encounter in order not to forsake our meeting together.
The donkey is sometimes viewed as a lowly animal but throughout the history of the Israelite
people it was a part of daily life.
Why?
Their sharp hooves make it more sure footed than a horse which meant it was better suited
to the steep slopes and rough mountainous terrain all around.
The long years that donkeys are famous for help to expel its internal heat quickly allowing
it to stay cool in hot environments.
These have great memories too enabling them to remember roots and people.
There's far more to this lowly beast of burden than meets the eye.
Next we are searching for signs of another animal.
One which helps us understand that to Jehovah there is more to us than meets the eye.
This is a very well preserved columnbarium or better known as a dovecote.
And types have been found around Israel.
This one is a series of manmade hollows carved into the limestone.
A pair of doves were housed in each one they were bred here.
And judging by the amount of holes raising doves was quite an industry.
Why were doves in such high demand while they provided meat the don was harvested as fertiliser
but there was also another use.
After the birth of a child a dove could be used as a sin offering and a second one as
the burnt offering by parents who could not afford a young ram.
No wonder then the closer we get to Jerusalem and the temple area the more ancient doves
coats have been excavated.
Directly beside the temple mount itself a first century fragment was found bearing the
word sacrifice next to an image of two birds.
Coins, merchants' weights and even these shops from Jesus era have also been excavated
beside the temple mount.
These finds led to the conclusion that these were the very streets where worshippers even
poor ones could buy animals to offer as sacrifices to Jehovah.
This provision teaches us that Jehovah loves each one of us and that he accepts our
best even if we feel it's insignificant.
Our circumstances do not define our worth to him.
Jehovah values our whole soul service even if it's limited by age, health or other circumstances.
As the scripture says man sees what appears to the eyes but Jehovah sees into the heart.
Something together as a family was important in Jesus' day and something found on practically
every table was bread.
In fact it's been estimated that 50-70% of the diet in Jesus' day was made up of bread.
No wonder the Hebrew and Greek expressions for eat a meal in the Bible literally mean
eat bread.
Of course before you could eat it you had to make it and while it only needed a few
simple ingredients this was no easy to ask.
To make the flower the women of the house would need to grind the wheat or barley or other
grains using a mill depending on the type of mill and how many were milling.
It could take hours before you had enough flour to feed a family.
After that the flour might be sieved to remove bits of stone from the mill and top of all
that water had to be drawn up from the nearest well or system.
This one is roughly six meters deep but the one believed to be Jacob's well was found
to be at least 23 meters deep.
You can see the grooves here, one in this old stone.
It's been worn down over the years by the rope pulling against it time after time.
Imagine by the time a few buckets of jars were drawn you might begin to feel a little
worn down too tired and ready to eat.
I'm popping in to see some of my new friends and I've been promised some bread.
Sister Jamila grew up milling her flower by hand too just like in Jesus' day providing
for our family's basic needs can take time and energy but by coming together at meal
times families can be refreshed physically and spiritually.
Breaking bread together draws us closer to each other and to Jehovah.
That's another simple recipe that will always stand the test of time.
Maybe in Joseph's life wasn't luxurious but their family still enjoyed rich moments
every day.
They put more importance on the atmosphere at the table than the food that was on it.
And so should we.
As we learn from the proverb, better than a fat and bull whether it's hatred is a dish of
vegetables, whether it's love.
The modern city of Nazareth.
To go back in time here we need to explore beneath the surface but what we find is worth
it.
These are the remains of a Jewish house dated to the first century.
Very few have been found.
This site gives a glimpse into the Nazareth that young Jesus knew.
Somewhere in the streets near here, he and his siblings laughed and played.
But when they went back to their home, what was it like?
Small houses consisted of just one or two rooms.
The walls were made of either stones or mud bricks and they could be coated in plaster.
Tree trunks supported the roof which was made from reeds or branches and then plastered.
This created the main living space which was in use constantly.
Here the women and girls shared in doing such tasks as spinning, weaving and preparing
food.
It was also where the family ate together.
In at night, the whole family slept side by side on mats rolled out on the floor.
In a two-story home, they would sleep on the second floor.
Tradesmen like Joseph often had open fronted workshops beside their house.
The roof was accessed by a ladder or stairs.
Depending on the season, they used it to eat together, relax together and worship together.
The requirement in Jehovah's Law that a parapet or small wall be built all around
rooftop kept everyone in the family safe from falling while they used this much-needed
extra living space.
Life was simple and it's likely Mary and Joseph lived in a humble home.
But Jehovah chose them not for their material wealth but for their spiritual qualities.
The atmosphere of love, happiness and peace within those walls had real value.
It was a place where the entire family could live, learn, work and worship together.
A place where everyone felt safe, not just physically, but spiritually, morally and
emotionally too.
While we don't know where in Nazareth, Mary and Joseph lived, we do know they loved God
and spoke about him and his laws when they sat in their house.
By doing the same, we too can help our children thrive and turn any house into a loving home.
The step straight, buried beneath Jerusalem for almost 2,000 years.
During the great festivals, thousands of worshipers flocked to Jerusalem, walking together
on these very steps as they made their way up to the temple, the city's beating heart.
For centuries, those festivals promoted unity and love amongst it is realise.
But did those things exist in the group the young Jesus and his family travelled with?
To find out, let's consider what happened on another part of the journey, the way back home.
To help understand that journey, we even listed the help of Daniel.
He's taking us to see one of the potential routes that Jesus and his family could have
used to return to Nazareth, the one that crossed through the Judean wilderness.
This location is fantastic because it really gives you a sense of that first leg of the journey.
Over there in the distance is the Mount of Olives, so Jerusalem is just behind it.
And right here is Jericho.
The ancient route connecting the two was more than 20 km long.
So if they had taken this route, it might have been somewhere near here that they stopped
for the night.
Yes, and in any case, whatever route they took, you can be sure that after a day's journey,
they would have covered a huge distance.
Don't doubt that.
Seeing the type of distance Mary and Joseph would have travelled, before even noticing that
their son was missing, adds to our understanding of what the Bible tells us.
Throughout that long journey, they had assumed he was with the group or close community of
relatives and friends that they had travelled with.
All of this testifies to the unity and love that existed amongst these dedicated people.
Today, love for Jehovah and his word form the foundation of our Christian community.
Regardless of who we are or where we are from, we are members belonging to one another.
As we journey through life, we rejoice together.
And sadly, at times, we weep together.
But either way, we are together.
Perhaps that's the lesson we need to remember.
Mary and Joseph didn't have to walk alone, and neither do we.
Tell Jericho.
A tell is a mound created by the remains of past cities and civilizations.
Each one has its own story to tell.
But family heads also told those stories as they taught their children about Jehovah.
I can imagine that as families walked on the road passing by this place, the kids loved
to hear the one about the walls of Jericho and how Jehovah made them fall.
The scriptures were at the heart of education in ancient Israel.
It started in the home and was built upon in the synagogue.
The aim of the education prescribed by Jehovah wasn't to ensure a high social standing,
but a high standing with him.
Of course, parents also taught their children skills for daily life.
The father took time to teach the family trade to the boys, while the mother taught household
skills to the girls.
But there was one fundamental facet of education that could help a child in all areas of life,
learning to read and write.
And we are heading to the Israelite ruins at Tell Geyser to learn more.
Around 100 years ago, amongst the ruffle, a limestone tablet was found, no bigger than
this replica here.
Dated to the 10th century BCE, this became known as the Geyser Calendar.
It contained a simple list of the seasons, leading archaeologists to conclude that it was
written by the hands of a youth that it was once a schoolboy's exercise.
When pottery broke, the shards were often used to write on.
This one shows rows of Hebrew letters, likely from a pupil's writing exercise.
People also wrote on wax-covered tablets.
When a mistake was made, the wax could easily be smoothed over and erased, so a student
could start again.
All these findings harmonize with what we see in the Bible, reading and writing were
common among God's people, even well before Jesus' time.
Living in such a culture, Jesus too learned to read and write.
This gave him the ability to study God's Word, which deepened his knowledge and love for
Jehovah.
Thousands of years later, it's the very same.
In order to draw close to God, our children need to study his Word and help others
do the same.
To do that, they need to be able to speak, read and write as well as they can.
Secular schools teach these skills, but if our young ones develop and polish them in
the congregation, just like Jesus, they will go on progressing in wisdom and in favor
with God and men.
The Sea of Galilee.
When the Western Shore lie the first century ruins of Magdala, including a synagogue
from Jesus' day, one of only a few uncovered to date, synagogues were built as one inscription
put it for the reading of the law and for teaching the commandments.
So what do they like inside?
A synagogue consisted of a main assembly hall, with stepped benches lining the walls where
the men and women who met together sat, a chest for keeping the sacred scriptures safe,
then a central space where a speaker or reader could stand next to a lector.
These buildings were designed so that all in the community could come to listen and learn
about their God, Jehovah.
Mary was one who did that.
By truly listening and meditating on what she heard, she developed a close relationship
with Jehovah.
This allowed her to trust in his ability to do what sounded impossible.
Meanwhile, in Jerusalem, others worshipped at the temple.
We could be forgiven for thinking of just one building when we hear the word temple, but
that word encompassed a vast complex, which was sat here upon Mount Mariah.
Mary speaks of hered the great, doubling the size of the temple area.
Surrounded by colonnades, there were several open areas or courts, each one leading closer
to the temple itself.
This plaza still has the capacity to hold hundreds of thousands of people today, and much
of the original retaining walls underneath it all are still in place.
Let's get a sense of scale.
One stone further along this wall is estimated to be almost 14 meters long, 4 meters deep,
and 4 meters high.
All of that is estimated to come close to 600 tons.
The temple area is colossal.
An aged and fasting widow may have felt small or even invisible in this place.
Yet despite the sad spiritual state which prevailed, Anna came day by day with fastings
and supplications.
Jehovah not only saw her, but he blessed her for her devotion.
Some 70 years later, after the destruction caused by the Roman army, you could have looked
on from the Mount of Olives and seen the temple lying in rooms.
The reputations of honest hearted ones like Mary and Anna remain intact even to this day.
Jehovah cherished their worship because it came from the heart and he does the same for
us today.
Whether young or old as Hebrews 6 puts it, he does not forget your work and the love
you show for his name.
Maybe that's the overall lesson from everything we've seen so far in the land of Jesus.
For Jehovah, it's all about the people, not the place.